In this video we're gonna talk about a
fundamental object orientated programming
concept, which is encapsulation.
Now, encapsulation is the mechanism
that allows you to restrict
access to certain components in
the objects that you are creating.
So, you're able to protect the members
of a class from external access
in order to really guard
against unauthorized access.
Now, we're not talking security here.
But we're stopping outsiders,
in other words classes or code outside
of the class that you're working on, from
accessing the inner workings of a class.
So, it can be very useful to hide
that inner working from another class
to sort of give you more control and
to be able to enable you to change
things without breaking code elsewhere.
So let's go through
an example of encapsulation.
So what we're gonna do first is
we're gonna create a class that
doesn't use encapsulation to show
why encapsulation is a good thing.
So we're gonna start off with
the class that doesn't use it,
and then we're gonna create
an enhanced class that does use it.
So let's go and create our class.
And we're going to create
a class called player.
And we're going to model a player class,
as in a player in a computer game.
So we're gonna call this class player.
It's a standard public class.
Let's create a couple of variables,
public string name, public string health.
So these three fields.
Public string weapon.
We'll just say that in this
game these are the three fields
that relate to the player's name,
the player's health, any hit points,
in other words, and player weapon.
Now, you may have noticed,
you may not have realized,
I've actually used a public scope there.
And we haven't gone into
great detail about scope, but
we have discussed it before.
But we normally use private.
But we're using public for a reason there,
and that'll all become clear shortly.
Now, we're not gonna create a constructor,
but
what we are going to do is we're
going to create two other methods.
The first one's called lose health.
And this would be called if
the player lost some health for
some reason and then fell off a cliff or
they got damaged in some way.
So we're gonna parse
a parameter called damage.
And we're gonna very
simply put this.health
equals this.health minus damage.
Then we'll just do a simple bit of output.
And I accidentally made that a string,
that should have been an image.
So I'll just fix that.
Actually, what I'll do there
is I'll put if damage, sorry,
if this.health is less than equal to zero,
then we'll put something
like player knocked out.
And then here, which we're not
gonna do now, I would put, and
then reduce number of lives remaining for
the player.
That's what we'd normally do.
So that's one method.
And we're gonna create another one which
is just going to return the amount of
health that is available or
that is remaining.
We'll call that public
int health remaining.
And that's purely gonna return
our variable, this.health,
which is our field in this class.
Pretty simple class, as you can see there.
There's a name.
There's the health, and
there's a weapon that we can assign.
Got a simple method there,
lose health, which would pass
the amount of damage to it.
Then if the total amount of health
falls equal to or below zero,
we would just kind of print out a message
to say the player's knocked out.
And that's where we would normally put
the code to reduce the number of lives and
to check whether the game's over.
So let's go back to our main class.
And we'll access or create a new class.
So we're gonna start off by putting,
you've seen this before,
player player equals new player.
We haven't created
the constructor in here.
And because we haven't created
a constructor, if you recall a default
constructor with no parameters had
been passed, has been created for us.
So we now need to now manually set those
fields, set the values for those fields.
So let's try player.name equals Tim.
Player.health, let's say it's 20.
Player dot weapon, let's say it's a sword.
So that's a way to
initialize those fields.
And of course, as you can see even though
we're not in that class we're able to
access those fields directly.
That's because we've set the scope
here and the public, or as public,
for those fields.
If we hadn't set those to private
we wouldn't be able to do that.
And just to test it's working, let's put
something like int damage equals 10.
Player.losehealth damage.
And if we print that out we'll
put remaining health equals,
and it should be player.healthRemaining.
So looking at that code, if we'd
started off with a player health of 20,
we've got 10 damage.
We've called the player.loseHealth method
which actually reduces the damage.
We should get some output here to
say the remaining health is 10.
So let's run that.
And you can see remaining health is 10.
So let's just make a bit more space here.
And, if we do another call,
we'll put damage equals 11.
And if we just copy these here,
paste those in.
And if you run this remaining health was
10, then that was for the first call.
The second call,
the player got knocked out and
that was the code that was called
from within the player class, and
remaining health is now
equal to negative one.
It was 20 take 21 is minus one.
So that's obviously working, but
I'm wondering whether you can
see a possible problem here.
We've created a method in here,
lose health, which is our
code that is going to manage the whole
process of the player losing health.
So this is where we put
in all our formulas for
making sure that we're
calculating damage correctly.
And you can see here there's a special
message that comes out if the player's
knocked out.
We might update something on
the screen in a complex application.
We'd want all our functionality
to lose health to be called from
that component in there.
But the problem then becomes, first of
all, we've got the ability to change
the player health, but
we could actually change the rules here.
So we could put, just before the call to
lose damage, we can put something like
player.health equals 100,
or say, 200 there.
So we're overriding that.
So we're taking the control
out of the player class.
You can see there that it was meant
to have been cooked to negative one.
But we've changed it, and consequently,
the player's got 189 health.
So by being able to access those fields
directly you're really potentially
opening up your application to be accessed
in ways that you didn't want it to do.
Because you may not ever want the player
to be able to change the health like that.
You might want to control that process.
And a good way of controlling the amount
of health that we assign is with
a constructor, for example.
That's something that
was seen in the past.
So that's one potential problem,
is the class that's
calling the player class is able
to change those fields directly.
There's also another issue.
So if we go back to our
player class again.
Now let's just say that we've decided
that we want to change the name here,
the internal name.
We think the name doesn't
make a lot of sense to us,
we want to be a bit more clearer.
We're gonna change the name to fullName,
that's gonna be the name that we're
gonna use from this point on.
So this is an internal change, and
in theory it shouldn't really affect any
other class because it's just internal
field name that we've defined that
we think is a good name for
this field in this class.
But if we go back to our other class now,
suddenly we've got an error.
And it's quite rightly saying that
it can't find that field anymore.
Because we're trying to access these
fields directly, we've got an error here.
Now, it's not the end of the world.
But what it means is that anytime
that we change a function or
something in here, change our name I
should say, field contains the field name.
Or something along those lines.
We have to also make the change here.
And in a small application like this,
of course, it's not gonna be a problem.
It's quite a quick change.
But when you're talking about big
applications it does become a problem.
Because the first thing here looking
at the main.Java thinking, okay,
it's name has changed, you have to
figure out what's the new name.
So you need to go back into the code and
have a look in define and
see what the new name is.
So it's not really a problem as
much when it's your code, but
when you start using other
commercial code it's very normal for
you to get given a library, a set of Java
classes and you're meant to use them.
So it becomes a case of you with
this sort of design having to
figure out how that class works which
may not be something you want to do.
The third issue with this approach is,
we might actually have forgotten
to do this because we've actually
put these names in manually,
we might actually forget to actually
initialize this all together.
And consequentially,
when the class is called for
the first time it hasn't got any health.
So, in other words,
we're not guaranteeing and ensuring
that to access the player class you can
only access it when the data is valid.
Now we can do that with a constructor,
we can actually make sure that the data is
valid and
that you've actually got a valid class.
But when you're giving control and getting
people to manually get access to fields
there's no real way of us guaranteeing
that the player health is set.
And the other thing is, of course,
we might want to have a method
that is in our player class to define
the maximum amount of health for a player.
So we might want to have some validation.
So we might want to go through a method,
for example, called now add health
to make sure that they haven't selected
a health that's greater than 100,
or some other form of validation.
And by allowing access at this level for
people to
actually just type in that directly,
we can't actually call that validation.
So this what encapsulation
actually does for us.
This is why we don't
want to code like this.
We want the ability to be able
to override these things so that
we can make sure that the class that we're
giving for access, that we're using for
access, is actually valid and that we've
got more control over these things.
So now you've seen of the bad things,
the bad ways of doing it.
Let's actually comment this code out, and
what we're going to do is we're going to
create a class that actually has
got proper encapsulation and
show you the right way of doing it.
So we're going to create a new class.
And I'm going to need to
call it enhanced player.
So, the difference is, here we're
gonna create our fields as private.
A private string name,
private int health,
private string weapon.
Next we're gonna create our constructor.
And we're gonna create a constructor
with three perimeters.
Click on OK.
And
what we're gonna do is we're gonna define
a default value of 100 for our health.
And what we're going to do
here in our constructor,
we're gonna put a bit of code in.
We're going to put if health,
this is the parameter health,
is greater than zero,
and health is less than or
equal to 100, then and
only then are we going to actually
assign the value to our field.
So we've got some basic validation in
there to ensure that the value of health
cannot, actually, I put 200 there,
that should've been 100.
So, in other words,
a value of between 1 and 100 inclusive,
is the only values that
we're accepting for health.
So you can see that now we've
created just one constructor.
So, in other words, we're guaranteeing
now that the name, the health, and
the weapon are initialized
when the class is created.
Now, we could put some more validation in
there to check the length of the name for
argument's sake to make sure
there's some characters in there,
that it wasn't null for argument's sake,
and likewise for the weapon.
So in other words, we could do some other
validation to make sure that it's valid.
And we can still create our lose health.
That can still be the same
method it was before.
So, public, and
the actual fact is to show that.
We'll just create, or just copy rather,
the exact same method.
Exactly the same as it was before.
We can also create a getter.
Let's just create a getter for our health.
Very similar to before, but
we're just using a getter this time.
So you can see already
we're restricting access
because now if we go back to here and
we do enhance,
player, we'll call up player again,
player equals new.
Enhance player.
Well, now that we've got this we
have to define some parameters.
We're going to put something like Tim,
50, sword.
And just to make sure that's
working we're going to do
an initial health is player dot,
and notice we cannot access
the field names directly,
the fields directly, because we've
assigned them as a scope of private.
So we need to use the getter.
So the getter isthe only way that's gonna
give us that mechanism to actually give
us direct access to the health.
So obviously if we run that now
we should get the value of 50.
Looking again at the code, we started with
a default of 100 so when the field health
is created for this class, when an object
is created, the default value is 100.
And if and only if the health has
passed with a value between 1 and
100 inclusive, we update that.
So, first time we run this we
should get the value of 50 because
it is a valid value in that range.
Initial health is 50.
But if we try to make something like 200,
we should actually get 100.
We're getting a 100, and
that's because this validation has failed.
Because health was,
health parameter was outside of
the values that we've assigned there.
In other words, it was greater than
zero but it was also greater than 100 so
that's why that condition failed.
So you can see straightaway by doing
it this way, we've got more control.
We've got some validation,
which we weren't able to do if
we weren't using encapsulation.
And just to be clear,
this is encapsulation.
This is what we're doing is,
by making our fields private,
we're making sure that our class is
not accessible, or the fields within
the class aren't accessible to
any classes that are outside.
So lets just say I wanted to change
now the internal name for health.
I could do that, I could click on that and
actually what I can do is show
you a feature of intelligi that's really
cool and enables you to do a quick rename.
So you can actually click
on what you want to rename.
Right click, go to refactor,
then choose rename.
And now if I go back and change this,
the part that's in red, I change that to
hit points, notice how everything's
changing on the screen as I type.
I'm gonna press Enter.
Pretty cool feature.
And it's actually saying get a method
found for the field hit points,
rename the getter as well.
I'm gonna actually put no there.
And I'll explain why shortly.
So we click on no.
And the other thing that actually comes
up and says, oh, I've noticed you're now
using the word health,
do you want to change that to hit points?
If I wanted to change it I could just
click on that and click on okay, and that
would actually change these references
that are showing on the screen there.
But I'm not going to do that
just to keep it consistent and
just to explain more shortly.
Click on OK.
The point is I've now changed
the field name which was originally
called health to hit points.
So internally we're now using the name
hit points instead of health.
But if we go back to our main class, we
notice now we can still run this code and
nothing's changed.
Still it comes up with 100, and the reason
is we're using the dot get health method.
And we have got no idea what the internal
naming was for that particular field.
We don't even know that,
we don't know anything about that and
we don't need to know anything about it.
We're just calling this get health
method and it's doing the rest for us.
So this is another cool feature
encapsulation, is we can make all these
changes to this enhanced player class,
we can create private fields and
private functions that we don't want to
be exposed to any other class, and we
can change those names at any time in this
code without affecting any other code.
That's really one of the huge
benefits of encapsulation,
is that you're not actually
affecting any other code.
It's sort of like a black
box in many ways.
What we're saying here is the only
way to create an enhanced player
object is to call the constructor
with these parameters.
And we've also got some
validation in there.
But the other thing is we can't also
fake it now with the lose health.
Cuz you've got no mechanism to actually
increase the health by any other means.
We can pass the initial amount of
health in the constructor, but
we can't then fudge it like we did in the
other class when we called that, when we
set the value and then we actually changed
the value midpoint when we shouldn't have.
So we're giving all the control to
the enhanced player class in this case.
And in the case of losing health,
we've insured that no matter what,
the only way with this class to
reduce the amount of health for
a player is to use this function.
And there's no other way for
a class that's outside of this
enhanced player class to access that.
So this is why we want you to
be dealing with encapsulation.
We really want to keep things confined and
sort of reduce access, or
protect is a better word.
We protect the members of the class,
and some methods, from external access.
So we're doing that to prevent
unauthorized set up or access.
In this case, as I said, we're using it
to make sure that the enhanced player,
when we create a new object from
the class, that it is valid.
It's got the right amount of
parameters and they are initialized.
But likewise, we're also making sure
that there's no unauthorized access to
the fields directly.
So that's why you want to
always use encapsulation.
It's something that you
should really get used to.
You definitely don't want to be creating
code like this when you're creating
public fields.
It's very rare that you
would need to do that.
There are situations
where you will want to,
but generally speaking you
don't want to do that.
You don't want to give that, expose
that access to other classes because,
as you saw, it's more work to make
those changes when you create or
when you change a field name, or something
of that nature, there's just more work for
you to go back to all the other places,
all the other codes that's using it,
to make sure that's changed as well.
So, that's encapsulation.
In the next video we'll go ahead and
I'll issue with a challenge.
And you can have a go at solving
the challenge I come up with.
So I'll see you in that next video.